.. _III.13:

13. Video Recording and Audio Recording Your Own Playing
--------------------------------------------------------

One of the best ways to improve musical playing and to practice for recitals is
to videotape or record it and watch/listen to it. You will be surprised at how
good and how bad the different parts of your playing are. They are often very
different from what you imagine yourself to be doing: good touch? rhythm? tempo
accurate and constant? What motions are breaking up the rhythm? Do you clearly
bring out the melodic lines? Is one hand too loud/soft? Are the
arm/hands/fingers in their optimum positions? Are you using the whole body --
i.e., is the body in synch with the hands or are they fighting each other? All
these and much more become immediately obvious. The same music sounds quite
different when you are playing it or listening to its recording. You hear much
more when listening to a recording than when playing it. Video recording is the
best way to prepare for recitals and can sometimes eliminate nervousness
because you have a clearer picture of your performance.

Audio recordings are a simple and effective way to check your playing because
you do not need high quality recordings to achieve the pedagogical objectives. 
Although recording video is a little more work, consider putting in the effort
of setting up a tripod or finding another solution for positioning your laptop
or phone such you can watch yourself play.

Start by making a one-to-one map between what you think you are playing and the
actual output (video or audio). That way, you can modify your general playing
tendencies so that the output will come out right. For example, if you are
playing faster than you think in easy sections and slower in difficult
sections, you can make the proper adjustments. Are the pauses long enough? Are
the endings convincing?

The recording session will reveal how you react in an actual performance, for
example, if you make a mistake or have a blackout. Do you react negatively to
mistakes and become discouraged, or can you recover and concentrate on the
music? During a performance, you tend to get blackouts, etc., at unexpected
places where you generally had no trouble during practice. Recording sessions
can flush out most of those problem spots. Pieces are not "finished" unless you
can record them satisfactorily. Videotaping is a good simulation of playing in
recitals. Thus, if you can play satisfactorily during videotaping, you should
have little trouble playing that piece in a recital. Once you start taping, you
may want to send the tapes to other people!

What are the disadvantages? The main disadvantage is that it will take a lot of
time, because you must watch and listen to the recordings. You might be able to
save some time by listening while you are doing some other chore. The recording
session itself takes little extra time because that counts as part of practice
time. However, every time you correct a section, you must re-record and listen
again. Thus there is no escaping the fact that watching/listening to yourself
is going to be a time consuming operation. However, it is something that every
piano student must do.
